---
id: "262"
post_id: "379"
author: "William Pettas"
date: "2009-09-28 16:31:01"
---
The first Giunti device (70 x 28 mm), two putti holding cornucopias in one hand and with the other hand holding the fleur-de-lis above, appears in the 1512/13 edition of the Opera of Lucius Apuleius. It then appeared often and was the only device by the press used until 1517. It contains no motto.\nZappella, fig. 645; Kristeller, Early Florentine Woodcuts, 1897, fig. 43 and Roberts, Printers' marks (London, 1893), p. 224. \n\nThe second device has two putti standing on a chest, each holding a cornucopia and together supporting overhead an elaborate fleur-de-lis. On the front of the chest are the initials ‘F.G.' The whole enclosed in a folded ribbon border (135 x 94 mm). The same border appears also in the 1506 Giunti edition of Dante. This, the second Giunti device, first appears in the 1517 Orationes of Aristides, the Vitae parallelae of Plutarch and the Icones of Philostratus. Davies says that Kristeller shows three devices with a similar border: nos. 21, 77, 182. This is the largest and most important of the early Giunti devices (Kristeller 46) and was last used in the 1527 Xenophon. Davies, Devices of the early printers, 1457-1560, pp. 312-313, fig. 66 and Zappella, Le marche dei tipografi e degli editori italiani del Cinquecento fig. 646.\n\nThe third and fourth devices, both appear in the 1517 Valerius Maximus, one on the title page, the other at the colophon. These are the only two devices, of the more than 40 used by the Giunti in Florence up to 1625, to use the motto in question. Zappella, figs. 649 and 647. Fig. 649 last appeared in 1588 in Dottrina Christiana breve per insegnare in pochi giorni by Diego de Ledesma which is the second part of the work Della scelta d'orazioni divotissime by.Girolamo (in religion Silvano) Razzi; Fig. 647 made its final appearance in 1617 at the end of the text of Achilles Tatius' Dell'amore di Clitofonte, e Leucippe. I find it remarkable how long some of the devices were used--or revived after several decades. I have not used a loupe on the later appearances, but to the naked eye they seem to be identical.\n\nAs to your correct remark about the fleur-de-lis and its relation to the Giunti and the city, I might add one little-known note. The lily is still visible, carved on the stone lintel of their onetime store in the via Proconsolo, opposite the Badia in Florence. It is now a store selling briefcases and suitcases and the sweet people running the store knew their place had a long history but were unaware that it was for a century the bookstore of Florence's most famous publishers. Sadly, even the city of Florence has done nothing, not even a plaque, to record the fact. I believe it was Douglas McMurtrie who pointed out that the first printer's devices were closely related to the signs over their shops. And one small correction--Bernardo was the second generation printer, not third. I am still puzzled by the remark made a century ago by Fumagalli to the effect that Bernardo was made a "comte palatin." I know of no archival evidence for this, and Fumagalli cited none. On the face of it, it seems highly unlikely.
