---
id: "558"
post_id: "321"
author: "Peter K"
date: "2015-05-25 19:52:51"
---
It's interesting how you have put the non-Latin reader in the context of marketing books. As accessible as a vernacular textbook was, do you think there were still major economic hurdles that might have inhibited their commercial success? I can imagine large institutional buyers (or influencers) and the educated elite shunning the vernacular texts. I recently came across Edmund Reeve's "An Introduction into the Greeke Tongue" (London: NP, 1650), a early Greek grammar in English. The title page reads "Composed for their sakes which understand not Latine; and yet are desirous to have some competent knowledge in the originall sacred scripture." One would think that a basic Greek grammar in English might have a ready audience, yet the book does not appear to have had much life beyond the first edition (a second issue including an an errata leaf was printed in 1657).\n\nAnother work that comes to mind is Elizabeth Elstob’s “Rudiments of Grammar for the English-Saxon Tongue” (London: Printed by W. Bowyer, 1715). The book is the first Anglo-Saxon grammar in English, and Elstob’s preface speaks to why she wrote it: "Considering the pleasure I myself had reaped from the knowledge I have gained from the original of our mother tongue, and that others of my own sex, might be capable of the same satisfaction: I resolv'd to give them the rudiments of that language in English dress.” This beautifully printed book, with new Anglo-Saxon types created for the project, was a commercial flop. It was ignored in favor of other works (in Latin) in use at the time. Like Reeve’s grammar, Elstob’s book ended with the first edition.
